[Kotlin Sync] Monitoring > Cluster Monitoring (#65)
mongodb/docs-kotlin-sync: source/monitoring.txt

==================

> Cluster Monitoring

Reviewer: S: this page covers cluster, command, and connection pool monitoring, so I'd rename to just "monitoring"
```suggestion
Monitoring
```

==================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to set up and configure **monitoring** in the
MongoDB Kotlin driver.

Monitoring is the process of getting information about the activities a running
program performs for use in an application or an application performance
management library.

> Monitoring the MongoDB Kotlin driver lets you understand the
> driver's resource usage and performance, and can help you make informed
> decisions when designing and debugging your application.

Reviewer: S: since it's the application you're monitoring by using the driver, rather than monitoring the driver itself (i think):
```suggestion
You can use the {+driver-short+} to monitor cluster, driver command, and connection pool events. These features help you make informed
decisions when designing and debugging your application.
```

In this guide you will learn how to perform these tasks:

> - :ref:`Monitor different types of events in the MongoDB Kotlin driver <monitoring-monitor-events>`

Reviewer: S: "by using" seems more accurate than "in"
```suggestion
- :ref:`Monitor different events by using the {+driver-short+} <monitoring-monitor-events>`
```

- :ref:`Monitor connection pool events with Java Management Extensions (JMX) and JConsole <monitoring-jmx>`

This guide shows how to use information about the meta activity of the driver.
To learn how to record data transactions, see the :ref:`Monitoring Data Changes <kotlin-sync-change-streams>` page. 

.. _monitoring-monitor-events:

Monitor Events
--------------

To monitor an **event**, you must register a **listener** on your ``MongoClient``
instance.

An event is any action that happens in a running program. The driver includes functionality
for listening to a subset of the events that occur when the driver is running.

A listener is a class that performs some action when certain events occur.
A listener's API defines the events it can respond to.

Each method of a listener class represents a response to a certain event. Each
method receives one argument: an object representing the event the method
responds to.

The MongoDB Kotlin driver organizes the events it defines into three categories:

> - Command Events
> - Server Discovery and Monitoring Events
> - Connection Pool Events

Reviewer: S: I don't think events need to be capitalized
```suggestion
- Command events
- Server Discovery and Monitoring events
- Connection Pool events
```

      :language: kotlin

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      {find=1}
      {find=2}
      {find=2, endSessions=1}

For more information on the classes and methods mentioned in this section, see
the following API documentation:

- `CommandListener <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/CommandListener.html>`__
- `MongoClientSettings <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/MongoClientSettings.html>`__
- `MongoClient <{+api+}/com.mongodb.kotlin.client/-mongo-client/index.html>`__
- `CommandStartedEvent <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/CommandStartedEvent.html>`__
- `CommandSucceededEvent <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/CommandSucceededEvent.html>`__
- `CommandFailedEvent <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/CommandFailedEvent.html>`__

Server Discovery and Monitoring Events
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A server discovery and monitoring (SDAM) event is an event related to a change
in the state of the MongoDB instance or cluster you have connected the driver to.

The driver defines nine SDAM events and provides the following listener
interfaces, which listen for three SDAM events each: 

- ``ClusterListener``: Listens for topology-related events

> - ``ServerListener``: Listens for events related to ``mongod`` or ``mongos`` processes

Reviewer 2: We're missing a conf example for `ServerListener` and `ServerMonitorListener ` something like:
```Kotlin
.applyToServerSettings { builder ->
            builder.addServerMonitorListener(object : ServerMonitorListener {
                override fun serverHearbeatStarted(event: ServerHeartbeatStartedEvent) {
                }

                override fun serverHeartbeatSucceeded(event: ServerHeartbeatSucceededEvent) {
                }

                override fun serverHeartbeatFailed(event: ServerHeartbeatFailedEvent) {
                }
            })
            builder.addServerListener(object : ServerListener {
                override fun serverOpening(event: ServerOpeningEvent) {
                }

                override fun serverClosed(event: ServerClosedEvent) {
                }

                override fun serverDescriptionChanged(event: ServerDescriptionChangedEvent) {
                }
            })
```

Reviewer 2: I don't have a strong opinion on this. I included these since we're dealing with telemetry, and monitoring the server's heartbeat and state could be useful.

- ``ServerMonitorListener``: Listens for heartbeat-related events

To monitor a type of SDAM event, create a class that implements one of the three
preceding interfaces and register an instance of that class with your
``MongoClient`` instance.

For a detailed description of each SDAM event, see the :spec:`MongoDB SDAM monitoring events specification </server-discovery-and-monitoring/server-discovery-and-monitoring-logging-and-monitoring.md>`.

Example
^^^^^^^

This example shows how to make a listener class that prints a message about the write
availability of your MongoDB instance.

To make an event that reports write status, perform the following tasks: 

#. Make a class that tracks cluster description changes, and

>    implements the ``CommandListener`` interface. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   implements the ``ClusterListener`` interface. 
```

When you no longer want to inspect your connection pools in JConsole, do the
following:

#. Exit JConsole by closing the JConsole window.
#. Stop the program running by the preceding code snippet.

For more information on JMX and JConsole, see the following resources from
Oracle:

- `JConsole Documentation <https://www.oracle.com/technical-resources/articles/java/jconsole.html>`__
- `Monitoring and Management Guide <https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/management/monitoring-and-management-using-jmx-technology.html>`__

For more information on the ``JMXConnectionPoolListener`` class, see
the API documentation for
`JMXConnectionPoolListener <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/management/JMXConnectionPoolListener.html>`__.

Include the Driver in Your Distributed Tracing System
-----------------------------------------------------

If you use a **distributed tracing system**, you can include event data from the
driver. A distributed tracing system is an application that
tracks requests as they propagate throughout different services in a
service-oriented architecture.

If you use the driver in a `Spring Cloud <https://spring.io/projects/spring-cloud>`__

> application, use to include MongoDB event data in the `Zipkin

Reviewer 2: > use to include MongoDB

need reformulation?

==========
Monitoring
==========

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to set up and configure **monitoring** in the
{+driver-short+}.

Monitoring is the process of getting information about the activities a running
program performs for use in an application or an application performance
management library.

> Monitoring the {+driver-short+} to monitor cluster, driver command, and

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
 You can use the {+driver-short+} to monitor cluster, driver command, and
```

connection pool events. These features help you make informed decisions when
designing and debugging your application.

> In this guide you will learn how to perform these tasks:

Reviewer: S: to avoid future tense, you can reword to:
```suggestion
This guide shows how to perform the following tasks:
```

- :ref:`Monitor connection pool events with Java Management Extensions (JMX) and JConsole <monitoring-jmx>`

.. tip::

   This guide shows how to use information about the meta activity of the driver.
   To learn how to record data transactions, see the :ref:`Monitoring Data Changes <kotlin-sync-change-streams>` page. 

.. _monitoring-monitor-events:

Monitor Events
--------------

To monitor an **event**, you must register a **listener** on your ``MongoClient``
instance.

An event is any action that happens in a running program. The driver includes functionality
for listening to a subset of the events that occur when the driver is running.

A listener is a class that performs some action when certain events occur.
A listener's API defines the events it can respond to.

Each method of a listener class represents a response to a certain event, and
accepts as an argument an event object representing the event.

The {+driver-short+} organizes the events it defines into three categories:

- Command events
- Server Discovery and Monitoring events
- Connection Pool events

The following sections show how to monitor each event category. For a full list of the events you can monitor,

> `see the event package of the {+language+} driver

Reviewer: S: since this is the java event package, not kotlin-specific:
```suggestion
`see the Java event package
```

<{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/package-summary.html>`__.

.. _command-events-kotlin:

Command Events
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A command event is an event related to a MongoDB database command. Some
examples of database commands that produce command events are ``find``,
``insert``, ``delete``, and ``count``.

To monitor command events, create a class that implements the
``CommandListener`` interface and register an instance of that class with your
``MongoClient`` instance.

> For more information on MongoDB database commands, see the
> :manual:`MongoDB manual entry on database commands </reference/command/>`.

Reviewer: S: to match our usual server manual linking syntax
```suggestion
For more information on MongoDB database commands, see 
:manual:`Database Commands </reference/command/>` in the
{+mdb-server+} manual.
```

.. note:: Internal Commands

   The driver does not publish events for commands it calls internally. This
   includes database commands the driver uses to monitor your cluster and
   commands related to connection establishment, such as the initial ``hello``
   command.

.. important:: Redacted Output

   As a security measure, the driver redacts the contents of some command events. This
   protects the sensitive information contained in these command events. For a
   full list of redacted command events, see the
   :spec:`MongoDB command logging and monitoring specification </command-logging-and-monitoring/command-logging-and-monitoring.md>`.

Example
^^^^^^^

This example shows how to make a counter for database commands. The counter
keeps track of the number of times the driver successfully executes each database
command and prints this information every time a database command finishes.

To make a counter, follow these steps:

#. Make a class with counter functionality that implements the ``CommandListener`` interface.
#. Add an instance of the new class to a ``MongoClientSettings`` object.

> #. Configure you ``MongoClient`` instance with the ``MongoClientSettings`` object.

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
#. Configure your ``MongoClient`` instance with the ``MongoClientSettings`` object.
```

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/monitoring_counter.kt
      :language: kotlin

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      {find=1}
      {find=2}
      {find=2, endSessions=1}

For more information on the classes and methods mentioned in this section, see
the following API documentation:

- `CommandListener <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/CommandListener.html>`__
- `MongoClientSettings <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/MongoClientSettings.html>`__
- `MongoClient <{+api+}/com.mongodb.kotlin.client/-mongo-client/index.html>`__
- `CommandStartedEvent <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/CommandStartedEvent.html>`__
- `CommandSucceededEvent <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/CommandSucceededEvent.html>`__
- `CommandFailedEvent <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/CommandFailedEvent.html>`__

Server Discovery and Monitoring Events
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A server discovery and monitoring (SDAM) event is an event related to a change
in the state of the MongoDB instance or cluster you have connected the driver to.

The driver defines nine SDAM events and provides the following listener
interfaces, which listen for three SDAM events each: 

> - ``ClusterListener``: topology-related events
> - ``ServerListener``: events related to ``mongod`` or ``mongos`` processes
> - ``ServerMonitorListener``: heartbeat related events

Reviewer: S: clarify the term definitions a bit
```suggestion
- ``ClusterListener``: Listens for topology-related events
- ``ServerListener``: Listens for events related to ``mongod`` or ``mongos`` processes
- ``ServerMonitorListener``: Listens for heartbeat-related events
```

To monitor a type of SDAM event, create a class that implements one of the three
preceding interfaces and register an instance of that class with your
``MongoClient`` instance.

For a detailed description of each SDAM event, see the :spec:`MongoDB SDAM monitoring events specification </server-discovery-and-monitoring/server-discovery-and-monitoring-logging-and-monitoring.md>`.

Example
^^^^^^^

> This example shows how to make a listener class that prints a message that lets
> you know if the driver can write to your MongoDB instance.

Reviewer: S: up to you, but more concise
```suggestion
This example shows how to make a listener class that prints a message about the write availability of your MongoDB instance.
```

> To make an event that reports write status: 

Reviewer: S: to make this a [full sentence](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/lists/#introductory-text):
```suggestion
To make an event that reports write status, perform the following tasks: 
```

> #. Make a class that tracks and checks cluster description changes, and
>    implements the ``CommandListener`` interface. 

Reviewer: S: remove comma before dependent clause; also I think "tracks" and "checks" mean pretty much the same thing
```suggestion
#. Make a class that tracks cluster description changes and
   implements the ``CommandListener`` interface. 
```

- `ServerListener <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/ServerListener.html>`__
- `ServerMonitorListener <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/ServerMonitorListener.html>`__
- `MongoClientSettings <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/MongoClientSettings.html>`__
- `MongoClient <{+api+}/com.mongodb.kotlin.client/-mongo-client/index.html>`__
- `ClusterDescriptionChangedEvent <{+core-api+}/com/mongodb/event/ClusterDescriptionChangedEvent.html>`__

Connection Pool Events
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A connection pool event is an event related to a **connection pool** held by the driver.
A connection pool is a set of open TCP connections your driver maintains with
a MongoDB instance. Connection pools help reduce the number of network handshakes
your application performs with a MongoDB instance and can help your
application run faster.

To monitor connection pool events, create a class that implements the
``ConnectionPoolListener`` interface and register an instance of that class with your
``MongoClient`` instance.

Example
^^^^^^^

This example shows how to make a listener class that prints a message each time
you check out a connection from your connection pool.

> To make an event that reports connection checkouts: 

Reviewer: S: complete sentence
```suggestion
To make an event that reports connection checkouts, perform the following tasks: 
```

- `MBean Documentation <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jmx/mbeans/standard.html>`__

JMX and JConsole Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This example shows how you can monitor the driver's connection pools using JMX
and **JConsole**. JConsole is a JMX compliant GUI monitoring tool that comes with
the Java Platform.

.. tip:: Consult the Official JMX and JConsole Documentation

   The descriptions of JMX and JConsole in this example are illustrative
   rather than a source of truth. For guaranteed up-to-date information, consult
   the following official Oracle resources:

   - `JConsole documentation <https://www.oracle.com/technical-resources/articles/java/jconsole.html>`__
   - `JMX documentation <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/jmx/index.html>`__

The following code snippet adds a ``JMXConnectionPoolListener`` to a
``MongoClient`` instance. The code then pauses execution so you can
navigate to JConsole and inspect your connection pools.

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/monitoring_JMX.kt
      :language: kotlin

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Navigate to JConsole to see your connection pools...

> Once you have started your server, open JConsole in your terminal using the

Reviewer: S: [using](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/alphabetical-terms/#std-term-using)
```suggestion
Once you have started your server, open JConsole in your terminal by using the
```

following command:

.. code-block:: shell

   jconsole

Once JConsole is open, perform the following actions in the GUI:

#. Select the process running the preceding example code.
#. Press :guilabel:`Insecure Connection` in the warning dialog box.
#. Click on the :guilabel:`MBeans` tab.
#. Inspect your connection pool events under the ``"org.mongodb.driver"`` domain.

When you no longer want to inspect your connection pools in JConsole, do the
following:

> #. Exit JConsole by closing the JConsole window
> #. Stop the program running by the preceding code snippet

Reviewer: S: since these are full sentences:
```suggestion
#. Exit JConsole by closing the JConsole window.
#. Stop the program running by the preceding code snippet.
```

include MongoDB event data in the
`Zipkin <https://zipkin.io/>`__ distributed tracing system.

If you do not use Spring Cloud or want to include driver event data in a distributed
tracing system other than Zipkin, you must write a command event listener that
manages `spans
<https://docs.spring.io/spring-cloud-sleuth/docs/current-SNAPSHOT/reference/html/getting-started.html#getting-started-terminology>`__
for your desired distributed tracing system. To see an implementation of such a
listener, see the Java source code for the :github:`TraceMongoCommandListener <spring-cloud/spring-cloud-sleuth/blob/eb01d5952b2e736970efbe3fc7e9784d119eeae9/spring-cloud-sleuth-instrumentation/src/main/java/org/springframework/cloud/sleuth/instrument/mongodb/TraceMongoCommandListener.java>`
class in the Spring Cloud Sleuth source code.

To learn more about Spring Cloud Sleuth, see
`Getting Started <https://docs.spring.io/spring-cloud-sleuth/docs/current-SNAPSHOT/reference/html/getting-started.html>`__
in the Spring Cloud Sleuth documentation.

To view a detailed description of a distributed tracing system, see
`Dapper <https://research.google/pubs/pub36356/>`__ from Google Research.

> .. tip::

Reviewer: S: since you have this admonition, I think you can remove the inline links (Spring Cloud, spans, Zipkin, etc) as well as the two paragraphs above ("To learn more about Spring Cloud Sleuth... To view a detailed description of a distribute tracing system ...")
